good afternoon so what I want you all to
do right now is to think of this mammal
that I'm going to describe to you the
first thing I'm going to tell you about
this mammal is that it is essential for
our ecosystems to function correctly if
we remove this mammal from our
ecosystems they simply will not work
that's the first thing the second thing
is that due to the unique sensory
abilities of this mammal if we study
this mammal we're going to get great
insight into our diseases of the senses
such as blindness and deafness and the
third really intriguing aspect of this
mammal is that I fully believe that the
secret of everlasting youth lies deep
within its DNA so are you all thinking
so magnificent creature isn't it who
here thought of a bat I can see half the
audience agrees with me and I have a lot
of work to do to convince the rest of
you so I have had the good fortune for
the past 20 years to study these
fascinating and beautiful mammals
one-fifth of all living mammals is a bat
and they have very unique attributes
bats as we know them have been around on
this planet for about 64 million years
one of the most unique things that bats
do as a mammal is that they fly now
flight is an inherently difficult thing
flight within vertebrates has only
involved three times once in the bat
once in the bird and once in the
pterodactyls and so with flight it's
very metabolically costly bats have
learned and evolved how to deal with
this but one other extremely unique
thing
bats that they are able to use sound to
perceive their environment they use
echolocation now what I mean by act
location the emitter sound from their
larynx out to their mouth or through
their nose this sound wave comes out and
it reflects and echoes back of objects
in their environment and the bats then
hear these echoes and they turn this
information into an acoustic image and
this enables them to orient in complete
darkness indeed they do look very
strange we're humans we are visual
species when scientists first realized
that bats are actually using sound to be
able to fly in orient and move at night
we didn't believe it for a hundred years
despite evidence to show that this is
what they were doing we didn't believe
it now if you look at this bat looks a
little bit alien indeed the very famous
philosopher Thomas Nagel once said to
truly experience an alien life form on
this planet we should lock yourself
inside a room with the flying
echolocating bat in complete darkness
and if you look at the actual physical
characteristics on the face of this
beautiful horseshoe bat you see a lot of
these characteristics are dedicated to
be able to make sound and perceive it
very big ears strange nose leaves but
teeny tiny eyes so again if you just
look at this bat you realize sound is
very important for its survival most
bats look like the previous one however
there are a group that do not use
echolocation they do not perceive their
environment using sound and these are
the flying foxes if anybody has ever
been lucky enough to be in Australia
you've seen them coming out of Botanic
Gardens in Sydney and if you just look
at their face you can see they've much
much larger eyes and much smaller ears
so among and within bats is a huge
variation in their ability to use
sensory perception now this is going to
be important for what I'm going to tell
you later during the talk now if the
idea
of bats in your belfry terrifies you and
I know some people probably are feeling
a little sick looking at very large
images of bats that's probably not that
surprising because here in Western
culture bats have been demonized really
of course the famous book Dracula
written by a fellow Northside Dubliner
Bram Stoker probably is mainly
responsible for this however I also
think it's got to do with the fact that
bats come out at night and we don't
really understand them were a little
frightened by things that can receive
the world slightly differently than us
bats are usually synonymous from some
type of evil events they are the
perpetrators in horror movies such as
this famous Nightwing also if you think
about us demons always have bat wings
whereas birds they typically or angels
have bird wings now this is Western
society and what I hope to do tonight is
to convince you of the Chinese
traditional culture that they perceive
bats as creatures that bring good luck
and indeed if you walk into a Chinese
home you may see an image such as this
this is considered the five blessings
the Chinese word for bat sounds like the
Chinese word for happiness and they
believe that bats bring wealth health
longevity virtue and serenity and indeed
in this image you have a picture of
longevity surrounded by five bats and
what I want to do tonight is to talk to
you and to show you that at least three
of these blessings are definitely
represented by a bat and that if we
study bats we will get nearer to getting
each of these blessings so wealth
how can a bat possibly bring us wealth
well as I said before bats are essential
for our ecosystems to function correctly
and why is this bats in the tropics are
major pollinators of many plants they
also feed on fruit and they disperse the
seeds of these fruits that are
responsible for pollinating the tequila
plant and this is a multi-million dollar
industry in Mexico
so indeed we need them for our
ecosystems to function properly without
them it's going to be a problem but most
bats are ferocious insect predators it's
been estimated in the US and a tiny
colony of big brown rats that they will
feed on over a million insects a year
and in the United States of America
right now bats are being threatened by
disease known as white nose syndrome
it's working its way slowly across the
US and wiping out populations of bats
and scientists have estimated that 1300
metric tons of insects a year are now
remaining in the ecosystems due to the
loss of bats bats are also threatened in
the u.s. by their attraction to wind
farms again right now back to looking a
little bit of problem they're going to
there they are very threatened in the
United States of America alone now how
can this help us well it has been
calculated that if we were to remove
bats from the equation we're going to
have to then use insecticides to remove
all those pest insects that feed on our
agricultural crops and for one year in
the US alone it's estimated it's going
to cost 22 billion US dollars if we
remove bats so indeed bats then do bring
us wealth they maintain the health of
our ecosystems and also they save us
money so again that's the first blessing
bats are important for our ecosystems
and what about the second what about
health inside every cell in your body
lies your genome your genome is made up
of your DNA your DNA codes for proteins
that enable you to function and interact
and be as you are now since the new
advancements in modern molecular
technologies it is now possible for us
to sequence our own genome in a very
rapid time and a very very reduced cost
now when we've been doing this we
realize that there's variations within
our genome so I want you to look at the
person beside you
let's have a quick look and what we need
to realize is that every 300 base pairs
in your DNA you're a little bit
different and one of the grand
challenges right now in modern molecular
medicine is to work out whether this
variation makes you more susceptible to
diseases or does this variation just
make you different again what does it
mean here what does this variation
actually mean so if we are to capitalize
on all of this new molecular data and
personalized genomic information that is
coming online that we will be able to
have in the next few years we have to be
able to differentiate between the two so
how do we do this well I believe we just
look at nature's experiments so through
natural selection over time mutations
variations that disrupt the function of
a protein will not be tolerated over
time evolution acts as a sieve it seems
like the bad variation and so therefore
if you look at the same region of a
genome in many mammals that have been a
evolutionary distant from each other and
also ecologically divergent you will get
a better understanding of what the
evolutionary prior of that site is ie if
it is important for the mammal to
function for survival it will be the
same in all of those different lineages
species taxa so therefore if we were to
do this want me to do with sequence that
region in all these different mammals
and ascertain if it's the same or if
it's different so if it is the same this
indicates that that site is important
for function so a disease mutation
should fall within that site so in this
case here if all the mammals that we
look have have a yellow type genome at
that site it probably suggests that
purple is bad this could be even more
powerful if you look at mammals they're
doing things slightly differently so say
for example the region of the genome
that I was looking at was a region
that's important for vision if we look
at that region in mammals that don't see
so well such as bats and we find that
backs that don't see so well have the
purple type we know that this is
probably what's causing this disease so
in my lab we've been using bats to look
at two different types of diseases of
the other senses we're looking at
blindness and why would you do this 340
million people are visually impaired and
45 million of these are blind so blind
us is a big problem and a lot of these
blind disorders come from inherited
diseases so we want to try and better
understand which mutations in the gene
causes the disease also we look at
deafness one in every 1,000 newborn
babies are deaf and when we reach 80
over half of us will also have a hearing
problem again there's many underlying
genetic causes for this so what we've
been doing in my lab is looking at these
unique sensory specialists at bats and
we have looked at genes or caused
blindness when there's a defect in them
jeans are cause deafness when there's a
defect in them and now we can predict
which sites are most likely to cause
disease
so bats are also important for our
health to enable us better understand
how our genome functions so this is
where we are right now but what about
the future
what about longevity this is where we're
going to go and as I said before I
really believe that the secret of
everlasting youth lies within the bat
genome so why should we be interested in
aging at all but really this is a
picture drawn from the 1500s of the
Fountain of Youth
aging is considered one of the most
familiar yet the least well understood
aspects of all of biology and really
since the dawn of civilization mankind
has sought to avoid it but we are going
to have to understand it a bit better in
Europe alone by 2050 there's going to be
a 70% increase of individuals over 65
and 170 percent increase in individuals
over 80 as we age we deteriorate and
this deterioration causes problems for
this for our society so we have to
address it so
could the secret of everlasting youth
actually live within the bat genome does
anyone to hazard a gasps over how long
this bat could live for who put up your
hands who says two years nobody won
how about ten years some how about
thirty how about 40 okay it's a whole
varied response this bat is my Otis
Bronte I it's the longest limb bash it
lives for up to 42 years and this bat
still alive in the wild today but what
would be so amazing about this well
typically in mammals there is a
relationship between body size metabolic
rate and how long you can live for and
you can predict how long a mammal can
live for given its body size so
typically small mammals live fast die
young think of a maze but bats are very
different as you can see here on this
graph in blue these are all other
mammals but bats can live up to nine
times longer than expected despite
having a really really high metabolic
rate and the question is how can they do
that
there are 19 species of mammal that live
longer than expected given their body
size than man and 18 of those are bats
so therefore they must have something
within their DNA that Able's them deal
with the metabolic stresses particularly
a flight they expand three times more
energy the mammal of the same size but
don't seem to suffer the consequences or
the effects so right now in my lab we're
combining state-of-the-art back field
biology go ahead and catching the
long-lived bats with the most up-to-date
modern molecular technology to
understand better what it is that they
do to stop aging as we do and hopefully
in the next five years I'll be giving
you a TED talk on that aging is a big
problem for Humanity and I believe that
by studying bat we can uncover the
molecular mechanisms that enable mammals
achieve extraordinary on cavity if we
find out what they're doing
perhaps through gene therapy we can
enable us to do the same thing
potentially this means that we could
halt aging or maybe even reverse it and
just imagine what that would be like so
really I don't think we should be
thinking them it's flying demons of the
night but more as our superheroes and
the reality that bats can bring us so
much benefits if we just look in the
right place they're good for our
ecosystem they allow us understand how
our genome functions and they
potentially hold the secret to
everlasting youth so tonight when you
walk out of here and you look up in the
night skies and you see this beautiful
flying mammal I want you to smile thank
you